WASHINGTON — House and Senate negotiators on Monday night agreed in principle to provide $1.375 billion for fencing and other physical barriers at the Mexican border, part of a broader agreement that would stave off another partial government shutdown without funding President Trump’s wall.

The agreement would allow for 55 miles of new bollard fencing, with some restrictions on location based on community and environmental concerns, according to two congressional aides, who requested anonymity to disclose details of the private negotiations. That is a fraction of the more than 200 miles of steel-and-concrete wall that Mr. Trump demanded — and 10 miles less than negotiators agreed on last summer, before Democrats took control of the House.

The deal, which must still pass the House and the Senate, and secure Mr. Trump’s signature, came together just before Mr. Trump, framed by banners emblazoned with “Finish the Wall” at an event in El Paso, doubled down on his demands.

“We’re building the wall anyway,” he told the crowd, saying that aides had told him that the negotiators had made progress.

The funding for 55 miles of new fencing is a figure far lower than the $5.7 billion that Mr. Trump had demanded and marginally less than the $1.6 billion for 65 miles of pedestrian fencing in the bill that the Senate Appropriations Committee had passed last year.

In December, the president, concerned about reneging on his signature campaign promise, refused to sign onto that legislation, forcing the nation’s longest government shutdown.

The negotiators also agreed to reduce the number of migrants and undocumented immigrants who can be held in detention. Democrats’ demand for a limit on how much detention space could be used for unauthorized immigrants arrested within the United States had threatened to derail the negotiations over the weekend, but lawmakers agreed to waive the demand.

Instead, lawmakers agreed to adhere to levels, set by a number of detention beds, established in the previous budget. That would fund 40,520 beds, a decrease of about 17 percent from current levels, which Immigration and Customs Enforcement reached in recent months only by surpassing its funding caps.

Privately, Democratic aides admitted the provision could have no impact on the number of beds ICE assigned for detainees. There is nothing to prevent Trump administration officials from funding a greater number of slots in excess of the lower target number, and then securing congressional outlays to cover those expenses, as ICE officials have done routinely in recent years, the aides said.

Beyond the border barriers, the agreement, which primarily funds the Department of Homeland Security, would provide $1.7 billion more for border security, including technology at ports of entry, more officers and humanitarian aid.

The Republican and Democratic leaders of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees announced the agreement, which includes seven unfinished spending bills, after three private meetings on Monday. Disaster relief for areas affected by storms and natural disasters last year will not be included, and lawmakers said they would address it separately.

It is expected to be finalized as early as Tuesday, well before the Friday deadline when funding would again lapse for a number of federal agencies. With fears of another damaging shutdown, lawmakers seemed confident that they had the support of party leadership and that Mr. Trump would be willing to sign the agreement.

“We think so,” Senator Richard C. Shelby, Republican of Alabama and the chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, told reporters when asked about the likelihood of the president’s signature. “We hope so.”

“The specter of another government shutdown this close, I thought tonight we didn’t want that to happen,” he added later.

Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, had urged him to “get it done” in negotiations, Mr. Shelby said. Representative Nita M. Lowey, Democrat of New York and the chairwoman of the House Appropriations Committee, said she had been in close communication with Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California and expected her support.

President Trump made $5.7 billion into a magic number when he claimed that was what's needed to secure the border. Democrats are never going to give him that amount. If Trump had simply focused on the policy of keeping the country safe, and not on a particular number, he might already be out of the current shutdown showdown with a win.

Instead, he latched on to the number and made his arguments as much about securing a dollar amount as the end goal. That primed his supporters to use billions to measure his success.

He refused to support a bipartisan compromise in February 2018 that would have given him $25 billion over 10 years, including $2.5 billion that year. Trump then rejected a stopgap spending bill in December that would have prevented a shutdown and left more time for lawmakers to reach a deal. Instead, he told now Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., “ I am proud to shut down the government for border security.”

The government did shut down, and even if Trump kept up his facade of pride, lawmakers didn’t. The stunt was an avoidable fiasco and everyone was relieved when Trump announced that he’d reopen the government to jump-start new negotiations.

Now, with the deadline to fund the government coming up once again, lawmakers on Monday night worked out a compromise to avert another painful and wasteful shutdown.

That deal would keep the government open and give Trump a chunk of money, $1.375 billion to be precise, for his border wall. It’s certainly not what the White House wanted, but it would prevent another costly shut down and get some of his wall built.

Trump should take it while he can. He should make a show of accepting the compromise, hold himself up as a leader, and then do a nice photo op as soon as construction starts at the border. He should talk up how he is building the wall, that he wants Congress involved, and how the $1.375 billion is simply a down payment, sure to be re-upped once everyone sees how well it works.

By all accounts, that would be a victory for the president marred only, of course, by the shutdown that didn’t seem so necessary after all.

But to pull that off, he’d have to stop talking about $5.7 billion as if extracting the money from Congress, dollar by dollar if necessary, was as important as starting to fix real issues at the border. Unilateral demands for money it turns out are not great material for the policy compromise necessary to keep the government running.

The Senate on Thursday afternoon approved a border security package to avert another government shutdown, as the White House said President Trump is preparing to take the extraordinary step of declaring a national emergency to obtain additional funding for his long-proposed wall on the U.S.-Mexico border.

The bill passed 83-16. The border security compromise now heads to the House for a vote.


WHAT IS A 'NATIONAL EMERGENCY,' AND HOW CAN TRUMP USE IT TO FUND BORDER WALL?

Before the Senate vote, White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said the president would sign the compromise bill, and would take executive action to unlock other federal dollars for the wall.

“President Trump will sign the government funding bill, and as he has stated before, he will also take other executive action -- including a national emergency -- to ensure we stop the national security and humanitarian crisis at the border," Sanders said in a statement. "The president is once again delivering on his promise to build the wall, protect the border, and secure our great country.”

Lawmakers have until 11:59 p.m. Friday to get the agreement through both houses of Congress and signed by Trump before several Cabinet-level departments shut down and hundreds of thousands of federal workers are furloughed in what would be the second partial government shutdown this year.

Sanders told reporters at the White House there will be announcement later about where the money will come from and how they allocate it. She said the White House is working on those details.

Asked if they were afraid of legal challenges, Sarah said, “We are very prepared but there shouldn’t be. The president is doing his job and Congress should do theirs.”

Speaking on the Senate floor earlier, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said he supports Trump declaring a national emergency to fund the border wall, something the president has suggested for weeks he might do.

BORDER COMPROMISE: TRUMP'S REPORTED PLAN TO SIGN BIPARTISAN DEAL GETS MIXED REVIEWS

But Democrats in Congress said they hoped Trump wouldn't declare an emergency.

"It’s a terrible idea," Delaware Sen. Chris Coons told Fox News. "We will all live to regret this one.”

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., told reporters Democrats "are reviewing our options."

There are at least 30 national emergencies in effect in the United States as of this month, according to a tabulation prepared by the Congressional Research Service.

The product of nearly three weeks of talks, the border security agreement would provide almost $1.4 billion for new barriers along the boundary. That's less than the $1.6 billion for border security in a bipartisan Senate bill that Trump spurned months ago, and enough for building just 55 miles of barricades, not the 200-plus miles he'd sought.

When asked Wednesday if they had an agreement that Trump would approve, Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Richard Shelby, R-Ala., told reporters: "We think so. We hope so."

The president, though, had been noncommittal about signing.

“Well, we haven’t gotten it yet,” Trump told reporters at the White House on Wednesday. “We’ll be getting it and we’ll be looking for land mines — because you could have that.”

Trump's assent would end a raucous legislative saga that commenced before Christmas and appeared to approach its ending, almost fittingly, on Valentine's Day. The low point was the historically long 35-day partial federal shutdown, which Trump sparked and was in full force when Democrats took control of the House, compelling him to share power for the first time.

Trump yielded on the shutdown Jan. 25 after public opinion turned against him and congressional Republicans. He'd won not a nickel of the $5.7 billion he'd demanded for the wall but had caused missed paychecks for legions of federal workers and contractors and lost government services for countless others. It was seen as a political fiasco for Trump and an early triumph for House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif.

The fight left both parties dead set against another shutdown. That sentiment weakened Trump's hand and fueled the bipartisan deal, a pact that has contrasted with the parties' still-raging differences over health care, taxes and investigations of the president.

Notably, the word "wall" — which fueled many a chant at Trump campaign events and then his rallies as president — does not appear once in the 1,768 pages of legislation and explanatory materials. "Barriers" and "fencing" are the nouns of choice.

The compromise also would squeeze funding for Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, in an attempt to pressure the agency to detain fewer immigrants gradually. To the dismay of Democrats, it would still leave an agency many of them consider abusive holding thousands more immigrants than it did last year.

The measure contains money for improved surveillance equipment, more customs agents and humanitarian aid for detained immigrants. The overall bill also provides $330 billion to finance dozens of federal programs for the rest of the year, one-fourth of federal agency budgets.

Trump has talked for weeks about augmenting the agreement by taking executive action to divert money from other programs for wall construction, without congressional sign-off.

Those moves could prompt congressional resistance or lawsuits, but would help assuage supporters dismayed that the president may be yielding.

Washington (CNN)Former acting FBI Director Andrew McCabe is confirming for the first time publicly that there were high-level discussions at the Justice Department about recruiting Cabinet members to invoke the 25th Amendment to remove President Donald Trump from office in the aftermath of former FBI Director James Comey's firing.

The discussions also included speculation about which Cabinet members could be on board with the idea, McCabe said in an interview with CBS's Scott Pelley. According to Pelley on "CBS This Morning" Thursday, McCabe confirmed the discussion among Justice Department officials. This segment of the interview, which was taped for "60 Minutes," was not aired Thursday morning.
McCabe, who was fired from the FBI last March, also said he ordered an investigation into whether Trump obstructed justice as a way to preserve ongoing inquiries into Russian election meddling in case there was an effort to terminate them.
The comments resurface the extraordinary tension between Trump and the nation's top law enforcement officials, though a number of the ones who worked with McCabe in the early days of the administration have since been dismissed or resigned.
In September, citing sources familiar with memos authored by McCabe, CNN reported that Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein discussed wearing a "wire" to record conversations with Trump and recruiting Cabinet members to invoke the 25th Amendment to remove Trump from office. Also in September, an anonymous "senior official in the Trump administration" claimed in a New York Times op-ed that there had been "early whispers within the cabinet of invoking the 25th Amendment."
It was not mentioned in the segment that aired Thursday if McCabe or anyone else approached Cabinet members directly to discuss the idea.

"These were the eight days from Comey's firing to the point that Robert Mueller was appointed special counsel. And the highest levels of American law enforcement were trying to figure out what to do with the President," Pelley said, adding that people involved were "counting noses" and speculating which Cabinet officials may be on board with the idea.
In a statement on Thursday, a Justice Department spokesperson said Rosenstein -- who repeatedly disputed the "wire" revelation back in September -- again denied pursuing or advocating for the use of the 25th Amendment to remove Trump from office.
"As the Deputy Attorney General previously has stated, based on his personal dealings with the President, there is no basis to invoke the 25th Amendment, nor was the DAG in a position to consider invoking the 25th Amendment," the statement read.
Both Trump and the White House on Thursday called McCabe a "disgrace," with the White House saying he had "no credibility" and Trump accusing him of being politically biased during his time at the FBI.
Vice President Mike Pence told MSNBC's Andrea Mitchell on Thursday he has "never heard any discussion of the 25th Amendment by members of this government and I would never expect to." Senate Judiciary Chairman Lindsey Graham called McCabe's comments "a stunning revelation" and that he would subpoena the former official to testify on Capitol Hill about the matter "if I have to."

In December, CNN reported that following the firing of Comey, McCabe took the extraordinary step of opening an obstruction of justice investigation into Trump before special counsel Robert Mueller was appointed in May 2017. In the interview that aired Thursday, McCabe told Pelley he "wanted to make sure that our case was on solid ground and if somebody came in behind me and closed it and tried to walk away from it, they would not be able to do that without creating a record of why they made that decision."
McCabe said that the day after Comey's firing and after meeting with Trump in the Oval Office, "I met with the team investigating the Russia cases and I asked the team to go back and conduct an assessment to determine where are we with these efforts and what steps do we need to take going forward."
"I was very concerned that I was able to put the Russia case on absolutely solid ground in an indelible fashion that, were I removed quickly or reassigned or fired, that the case could not be closed or vanish in the night without a trace," said McCabe, who is promoting his forthcoming book, "The Threat: How the FBI Protects America in the Age of Terror and Trump."
In its statement on Thursday, the White House called McCabe's investigation "completely baseless."
McCabe was fired by then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions in March following an inspector general report that concluded he misled investigators about his role in directing other officials at the FBI to speak to The Wall Street Journal about his involvement in a public corruption investigation into the Clinton Foundation. The Justice Department's watchdog has referred his findings on McCabe to the US Attorney's office in Washington for possible criminal charges. The case remains under investigation.

House lawmakers are coming up with different answers to that question as they and their Senate colleagues prepare to vote on a bipartisan funding measure to avert another government shutdown and provide $1.375 billion for a barrier in Texas, along the U.S.-Mexico border.

It appears the majority of Republicans and Democrats will back the legislation. But don’t expect them to agree on what to call the structure they are funding.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has called a wall "immoral" and many Democrats agree. Still, to justify voting for the border security compromise, Democratic lawmakers are going out of their way to insist that a barrier is not the same thing as a wall.

“Clearly, there is not funding for a wall, and that was very important to us,” Rep. Mark Pocan, D-Wis., co-chair of the House Progressive Caucus, told reporters Wednesday morning. 

Pocan hadn’t made up his mind on the measure Wednesday, but appeared to be leaning toward voting for it. He said the way the legislation had been outlined included a provision requiring the structure to be made of designs from before the 2017 bill.

That would rule out a concrete wall once proposed by President Donald Trump, who promised repeatedly during his presidential campaign that he would build a border wall and make Mexico pay for it.

But the bill does allow for a fence made of steel slats, which Trump has more recently endorsed. It does, however, ban the barrier from going through certain areas, such as the Bentsen-Rio State Park, the National Butterfly Center and the Santa Ana Wildlife Refuge.

Juan Vargas, a Democrat whose San Diego district runs along the border with Mexico, opposes any new physical barrier. He disagreed with Pocan about how to describe the structure outlined in the bill.

“I live there, and nine out of 10 people who go up and take a look, I say, ‘What is that?’ They say: ‘Oh, that’s a wall,’” Vargas said. “They wouldn’t say it’s a fence made of steel. It looks like a wall to me.”

Republicans who want a wall say they don't care what the structure is called, as long as there is one. 

Rep. Doug Collins, R-Ga., said the word wall "undoubtedly matters to the Democrats," but the Republican base doesn't care what it's called. They just want border security. 

"Frankly, the president has done a good job taking the abstract (concept) of a wall, and now, making it into border security and how it matters to their community," Collins said. "I think it was slow to get there, but I think people are starting to understand it."

Rep. Mark Meadows, chairman of the hardline House Freedom Caucus and a close ally of Trump, was more blunt.

If Democrats don't want to call it a wall, "that's fine," the North Carolina Republican said.

“I don’t care what you call it – if it secures our border, it can be a moat," he said.

Meadows opposes the legislation, but he said if the president were to sign it, his base would forgive him as long as he was going to look elsewhere for money to boost construction beyond what the bill provides.

But not everyone was willing to play along. 

“This whole semantics issue is so childish," said Rep. Tom Reed, R-N.Y., the co-chair of the Problem Solvers Caucus, a group equally split between Republicans and Democrats that aims to find bipartisan policy solutions. 

"Whether it’s a steel, concrete barrier or it’s a see-through material – bottom line, we’re better than this," Reed said. "We should be able to come together and say, 'Look, we want to secure the border. How do we do it?' And don’t be afraid of a word."

On Wednesday, Trump assured a group of local law-enforcement officers that, one way or another, he intends to build a wall and said he wants one that would be harder to climb than the world's tallest mountain.

"It’s a big wall, it’s a strong wall," Trump said. "They would be able to climb Mt. Everest a lot easier, I think."

But even Trump also has said he's fine with Democrats using other terms. He once said it didn't matter what Democrats called the structure – he just wanted $5.7 billion to pay for it.

For all he cares, he said, they can call it "peaches."
